Demo 01 : Basics
================

In this demo we investigate the basics of cestrel for
optimal control problems. To do so, we investigate the "mother
problem" of PDE constrained optimization, i.e.,

min J(y, u) = 1/2 || y - y<sub>d</sub> ||<sub>&Omega;</sub><sup>2</sup> + &alpha;/2  || u ||<sub>&Omega;</sub><sup>2</sup>


subject to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;  - &Delta; y  = u &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; in &Omega;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;y = 0 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; on &Gamma;


(see, e.g., Tröltzsch, Optimal Control of Partial Differential Equations,
or Hinze et al., Optimization with PDE constraints). Here,
the norm is the L<sup>2</sup> norm on &Omega;.

For this first example, we do not consider control constraints,
but search for an optimal control u in the entire space
L<sup>2</sup>(&Omega;), for the sake of simplicitiy. For
the domain under consideration, we use the unit square
&Omega; = (0,1)x(0,1), since this is built into cestrel.

In the following, we will describe how to solve this problem
using cestrel, using as much of the package as possible. Moreover,
we also detail alternative / equivalent FEniCS code which could
be used to define the problem instead.

The initialization
------------------

We begin by importing fenics and cestrel. For the sake of
better readability we import everyting from the fenics package.

    from fenics import *
    import cestrel

At the beginning of the script it is usually very beneficial
to disable the verbose output of fenics such that it does not
interfere with cestrel's output. Therefore, we use the line

    set_log_level(LogLevel.CRITICAL)

which disables most of fenics's output messages.

Next, we have to load the config file which loads the user's
input parameters into the script. For a detailed documentation
of the config files and the parameters within, we refer to
the file "config_doc.md". The config is then loaded via

    config = cestrel.create_config('./config.ini')

> An alternative way of loading the config file (usually found
> in previous iterations of the software) would be to load
> the config file manually, via
>    
>     import configparser
>     config = configparser.ConfigParser()
>     config.read('path_to_config_file')
>
> which is equivalent for optimal control problems, but does
> not work for shape optimization problems. Hence, the former
> method is to be preferred.

Next up, we have to define the state equation. This mostly
works with usual fenics syntax. In cestrel, we can quickly
generate meshes for squares and cubes, as well as import
meshes generated by gmsh, for more complex geometries. In this
example we take a built-in unit square as example. This is generated
via

    mesh, subdomains, boundaries, dx, ds, dS = cestrel.regular_mesh(50)

The input for regular_mesh determines the number of elements that
are placed along each axis of the square. Note, that the mesh could be
further manipulated with additional, optional arguments, and we
refer to the documentation of regular_mesh for more infos. Note,
that the subdomains object is a (empty) MeshFunction, and that
boundaries is MeshFunction that contains markers for the following
boundaries
- The left side of the square is marked by 1
- The right side is marked by 2
- The bottom is marked by 3
- The top is marked by 4
Again, we refer the reader to the documentation of regular_mesh
for the marking conventions.

With the geometry defined, we create a function space with the classical
fenics syntax

    V = FunctionSpace(mesh, 'CG', 1)

which creates a function space of continuous, linear Lagrange
elements.

Definition of the state equation
--------------------------------

To describe the state system in cestrel, we use nearly standard
fenics syntax, and the differences will be highlighted in the
following. First, we define a Function object that models our
state variable y, and a Function that models the corresponding
adjoint variable p via

    y = Function(V)
    p = Function(V)

Next up, we analogously define the control variable as a Function

    u = Function(V)

This enables us to define the weak form of the state equation,
which is tested not with a TestFunction but with the adjoint
variable via the classical fenics / UFL syntax

    e = inner(grad(y), grad(p))*dx - u*p*dx

> For the clasical definition of this weak form with fenics
> one would do the following
>
>     y = TrialFunction(V)
>     p = TestFunction(V)
>     u = Function(V)
>     a = inner(grad(y), grad(p))*dx
>     L = u*p*dx
>
> as this is a linear problem. However, to have greater flexibility
> we have to treat the problems as being potentially nonlinear.
> In this case, the classical fenics formulation for this as
> nonlinear problem would be
>
>     y = Function(V)
>     p = TestFunction(V)
>     u = Function(V)
>     F = inner(grad(y), grad(p))*dx -u*p*dx
>
> which could then be solved via the "solve" interface. The
> weak formulation we consider above mimics this nonlinear
> formulation, which comes more naturally for nonlinear
> variational problems (see the fenics examples). However,
> for the use with cestrel, the state variable y **must not**
> be a TrialFunction, and the adjoint variable p **must not**
> be a TestFunction. They **have to** be defined as regular
> Functions, otherwise the code will not work properly.

After defining the weak form of the state equation, we now
specify the corresponding (homogeneous) Dirichlet boundary
conditions via

    bcs = cestrel.create_bcs_list(V, Constant(0), boundaries, [1,2,3,4])

This creates Dirichlet boundary conditions with value 0 at the
boundaries 1,2,3, and 4, i.e., everywhere.

> Classically, these boundary conditions could also be defined
> via
>
>     def boundary(x, on_bdry):
>         return on_boundary
>     bc = DirichletBC(V, Constant(0), boundary)
>
> which would yield a single DirichletBC object, instead of
> the list returned by create_bcs_list. Any of the many methods for
> defining the boundary conditions works here, as long as it
> is valid input for the fenics' solve function.

With the above description, we see that defining the state system
for cestrel is nearly identical to defining it with fenics,
the only major difference lies in the definition of the state
and adjoint variables as Function objects, instead of Trial- and
TestFunctions.

Definition of the cost functional
---------------------------------

Now, we have to define the optimal control problem which we do
by first specifying the cost functional. To do so, we define the
desired state y_d as an UFL expression, i.e.,

    y_d = Expression('sin(2*pi*x[0])*sin(2*pi*x[1])', degree=1)

Alternatively, y_d could also be a function or any other object
that is usable in an UFL form (e.g. generate with SpatialCoordinate).

Then, we define the regularization parameter alpha and the tracking-type
cost functional via the commands

    alpha = 1e-6
    J = Constant(0.5)*(y - y_d)*(y - y_d)*dx + Constant(0.5*alpha)*u*u*dx

The cost functional has to be a UFL form, which returns the
value when evaluated with the assemble command from fenics.
These definitions are also classical in the sense that they
would have to be performed in this (or a similar) way in fenics
when one would want to evaluate the (reduced) cost functional,
so that we have only very little overhead.

Definition of the optimization problem and its solution
-------------------------------------------------------

Finally, we set up an optimal control problem ocp and then
directly solve it via cestrel with the commands

    ocp = cestrel.OptimalControlProblem(e, bcs, J, y, u, p, config)
    ocp.solve()

This concludes the demo, and the corresponding full code can
be found in the file "demo_01.py".
